THE CALIBRATION REFUSAL: CRITERIA COMMITTED BEFORE THE CODE

Written 26 August 2026, before any implementation exists. This is the
calibration track's last rung, gated since 23 August on "a corpus
prediction the Mac must score" — a gate the corpus reproduction
cleared this morning. The rule of this document is the project's
oldest: decide now, in writing, what each possible observation will
change, because a decision made after seeing the data can always be
bent to fit it.

WHY A REFUSAL AT ALL. Every blink number this instrument produces is
a comparison against the calibrated ruler, and the August validation
round found the ruler broken on three of six machines. The freeze
(docs/baseline-freeze.txt) fixed the drift class by construction and
narrowed born-too-long with the median ceiling. What remains is the
macbookair shape: a learning window whose top and middle DISAGREE —
p90 at 10.35 mm against a median of 7.51, spread 1.378 — where the
ceiling binds and the ruler is born AT the ceiling, 9.3875 mm, still
1.35 times that session's resting eye. Today the page prints that
birth certificate and proceeds. A clipped birth is a guess wearing a
number's clothes, and proceeding on it is the last silent success in
the calibration story.

THE CRITERION, AND WHY IT ADDS NO CONSTANT. The refusal fires on
exactly one signal: ceilingBound — the learning window's p90 exceeds
BASELINE_MEDIAN_CEILING_FACTOR (1.25) times the window's own median,
computed in src/core/calibrationWindow.ts since 23 August, exported
in every session as calibration_ceiling_bound, and pinned
cross-language by test. No new threshold is introduced, because no
benchmark of spread ratios across many good sessions exists to
choose one from, and this project does not choose constants against
data it has not read. The ceiling factor already on the books says
what "top and middle disagree" means; the refusal only changes what
the instrument DOES about it: today it clips, from this increment it
refuses.

WHAT THE REFUSAL DOES, EXACTLY.

  - At the moment the learning window freezes ceiling-bound, the
    session enters a refused-calibration state instead of running
    with a clipped ruler.
  - WITHHELD, because each depends on the blink line the ruler
    defines: blink count, blink rate, blink durations, PERCLOS, long
    closures and their alerts, and the alertness score.
  - STILL SHOWN, because none of them consult the ruler: the live
    aperture trace, face presence, processing and delivery rates,
    and gaze.
  - THE SENTENCE, verbatim: "Calibration was refused: while learning
    your baseline, the widest eye openings disagreed with the middle
    ones by more than the instrument allows, which usually means
    blinks or a squint contaminated the learning period. Numbers
    that depend on the blink line are withheld rather than guessed.
    Restart the camera and keep your eyes comfortably open for the
    first thirty seconds."
  - THE EXPORT still writes: per-second aperture rows, the full
    birth certificate, and calibration_refused: true in the
    metadata. A refused session is a result, not an accident, and
    an analysis must be able to count refusals.

WHAT BIRTH CANNOT SEE, STATED SO THE REFUSAL DOES NOT OVERCLAIM.
Two pathologies remain invisible at calibration time and are NOT
covered: a window that reads uniformly high (macbookair's learning
median 7.51 against a whole-session median of 6.93 — the future is
not available at birth), and a ruler born SHORT through a squint,
visible only analysis-side as over_resting below 1.0. Both stay
where they are: the analysis-side soundness check, and the short-
ruler rule already queued for the next validation round.

THE PREDICTIONS, COMMITTED BEFORE ANYTHING IS SCORED.

  1. NONE of the eight Eyeblink8 clips is ceiling-bound. Scored
     without a re-run, from the birth certificates already in the
     measured exports:

         grep -H "calibration_ceiling_bound" \
             "$DATASETS/eyeblink8-measured-m5max-remux"/*.seconds.csv

     Every line reading false confirms it. The owner's committed
     300-frame fixture is already pinned unbound by test.

  2. THEREFORE the refusal changes NOTHING on the corpus: after the
     code lands, a full corpus re-run must reproduce the published
     table digit for digit, exactly as the 26 August reproduction
     did. That re-run happens before the increment merges, per the
     standing rule that anything touching detector behaviour owes a
     corpus run.

  3. IF ANY CLIP IS BOUND, prediction 1 is wrong and the criterion
     would rewrite the published table. Then this document's rule
     is: the increment STOPS before wiring, the finding is published
     here as a dated section, and the criterion is reconsidered in
     the open — because a refusal that silently deletes a benchmark
     is worse than the clipped ruler it replaces.

  4. The refused state must be REACHABLE by test: a synthetic
     window shaped like macbookair's (spread 1.378) refuses, and
     the fixture's window does not. Mutations on both directions.

Whatever the grep shows is appended below as a dated section, and
this prediction is not edited.

PREDICTION 1 IS CONFIRMED, 26 August 2026. The owner ran the grep
over the eight measured remux exports on the M5 Max: every line
reads calibration_ceiling_bound false. No Eyeblink8 clip is
ceiling-bound, the criterion rewrites nothing on the corpus, and by
this document's own rules the code increment may begin. Prediction 2
remains open until the post-code corpus re-run reproduces the
published table digit for digit, before that increment merges.
