LATENCY, MEASURED (ROADMAP 7.8)
===============================

Written 21 August 2026. Reproducible with

    BLINKLAB_PRINT_TABLE=1 npx vitest run test/core/alertLatency.test.ts

Two questions, and they have different kinds of answers. The time
from eye closure to alert is a property of the CODE, deterministic,
the same on every machine, so its numbers below are exact. The
per-frame compute cost is a property of the MACHINE, so its number
below is one machine's reading with the command that re-measures it
on yours.

TIME FROM EYE CLOSURE TO ALERT
------------------------------

The long closure detector fires on the first frame STRICTLY beyond
LONG_CLOSURE_THRESHOLD_MS (500 ms, aliased to the blink maximum so
every closure lands in exactly one bin) after the closure began. The
alert governor fires on that same frame when outside its debounce
window. So the latency is 500 ms plus at most one frame period, and
where in that band it lands depends only on where the frames fall:

    25 Hz    520.0 ms
    30 Hz    533.3 ms
    60 Hz    516.7 ms

It cannot be under 500 ms by design: an earlier alert would mean the
blink / long-closure partition leaked, and a blink-sized closure
would page somebody. The frame-period term ties this to the
processing-rate finding (docs/blink-sample-rate.txt): a 29 Hz
machine adds up to 34 ms, a 127 Hz machine up to 8, and neither
matters against the 500.

THE SECOND REGIME, stated rather than implied: within
ALERT_DEBOUNCE_MS (5000 ms) of a firing, a new long closure is
counted but not told, so the worst-case time from closure to a TOLD
person is the debounce window plus the detection latency above. That
is the governor's deliberate trade against alarm fatigue, with the
suppressed count kept as a number rather than a silence.

PER-FRAME COMPUTE COST OF THE CORE CHAIN
----------------------------------------

The reducers the frame handler runs on the closure-to-alert path, in
main.ts's own order: baseline, blink, long closure, alert, PERCLOS.
Measured over a realistic minute at 60 Hz, a blink every two seconds
and one long closure, with the PERCLOS window fully loaded by the
end, which is the worst case its per-frame filter pays:

    41.8 microseconds per frame    (this machine, a cloud container)

The test asserts a ceiling of 2 ms per frame, three orders of
magnitude of headroom, so a noisy CI machine cannot turn it red
while an accidental per-frame O(n) growth still would. The ceiling
IS the check roadmap 7.8 asks for; the measured figure is what the
command above prints.

WHAT THIS DOES NOT INCLUDE, so nobody reads it as the whole story:
the face model's own inference, about 6 ms recorded locally under
roadmap 8.7, which CI cannot measure because its machines have no
camera; the camera's exposure and delivery, which no page can see;
and the display latency of the banner itself. The end-to-end number
a person experiences is the 500-and-a-frame above plus those, and
the model term is the only one of them this project has measured.

The three latency tests were proven sensitive to the mechanism by
mutation: removing the threshold comparison from longClosureStep
turns them red. The debounce test survives that mutation, correctly,
because it pins the governor and not the detector.

THE 13.8c RE-LOOK, 18 September 2026
------------------------------------

Roadmap 13.8c asked for this document to be re-run and for the
"about 42 microseconds" sentence above to be WITHDRAWN AS A CLAIM
ABOUT THE TICK, and the distinction is the finding. Re-run today on
this container, the same command as above:

    39.9 microseconds per frame over 3600 frames at 60 Hz

so the number itself stands and the ceiling test stays green. What
is withdrawn is the reading of it as the page's per-tick cost. The
measured chain is the closure-to-alert reducers only — baseline,
blink, long closure, alert, PERCLOS — and the live tick also carries
the gaze chain and the DOM. Before this row's residue landed, two of
those costs grew with the tick rate itself: the fixation detector
re-scanned its whole buffer every tick, so its per-second cost was
QUADRATIC in tick rate (about 5 ms per tick at 120 Hz with a still
gaze, two orders of magnitude over the sentence above), and the
readout writer rebuilt three DOM nodes per readout per write whether
or not the text had changed.

What changed, each with its pin:

- detectFixations folds each new sample into a running min/max, so
  the scan is linear; the linearity is a test
  (test/core/fixation.test.ts, the 13.8c describe block), not a
  comment.
- writeReadout remembers the last text per element and an unchanged
  write is a no-op, so a readout costs DOM work only when it has
  something new to say.
- The pupil read draws only the source rect it reads back
  (readVideoPixels, pinned in test/io/videoCanvas.test.ts): the
  whole-frame draw it replaces moved about eight megabytes of 1080p
  pixels across the canvas boundary to read a box a few dozen
  pixels wide, twice a second.

What this section does NOT claim: a measured end-to-end tick cost on
a 120 Hz machine. This container has no display loop under load and
no camera; the quadratic term is gone by construction and by test,
and the honest per-tick figure on real hardware belongs to the
owner's A/B live session (13.8c's first clause), not to this file.
